PATIENT: 61-year-old Caucasian man

DIAGNOSES: alcoholic liver disease. portal hypertension. anaemia. thrombocytopaenia. aortic stenosis. Enterococcus durans bacteraemia. Enterococcus durans aortic valve endocarditis. oesophageal varices. decompensated congestive heart failure (The patient required readmission to the hospital 2 weeks later for treatment of decompensated congestive heart failure ... and worsening renal failure). renal failure. progressive heart failure. end-stage liver cirrhosis. liver failure.

MEDICATIONS: Ceftriaxone 2 g every 24 h secondary to clinical suspicion of spontaneous bacterial peritonitis. Vancomycin 20 mg/kg every 12 h. Ampicillin 2 g every 4 h. Gentamicin 1 mg/kg every 8 h, changed from trough <1 mcg/mL.

RESULTS: temperature 100.6 F. leucocyte count 5.1 x 10^9/L. haemoglobin 7.9 g/dL. platelets 43,000/uL, unchanged from 43,000/uL. alanine transaminase 11 U/L. aspartate transaminase 41 U/L. alkaline phosphatase 72 U/L. albumin 1.7 g/dL. INR 1.5. creatinine 1.08 mg/dL, unchanged from 1.08 mg/dL. BNP 1122 pg/mL, unchanged from 1122 pg/mL. C-reactive protein 69.67 mg/L. penicillin susceptibility 22 mm. ampicillin susceptibility 26 mm. vancomycin susceptibility 22 mm. BNP 2376 pg/mL, unchanged from 2376 pg/mL. creatinine 1.67 mg/dL, unchanged from 1.67 mg/dL. INR 1.5. platelets 25,000/uL, unchanged from 25,000/uL. BNP 4892 pg/mL. creatinine 3.56 mg/dL. platelets 20,000/uL.

CLINICAL REASONING: Abdominal ultrasound findings were consistent with portal hypertension. Transoesophageal echocardiogram was deferred because of the risk of bleeding secondary to high-grade oesophageal varices. The splenic flexure ulcer was assumed to be ischaemic. Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis was considered in the differential but not confirmed. Urinary tract infection was considered in the differential but not confirmed. A transthoracic echocardiogram was requested to evaluate for endocarditis on account of high-grade bacteraemia. Repeat blood cultures were drawn from peripheral sites and the central catheter to determine whether there was evidence of line infection. Removal and culture of the central line was not possible because it was too risky to remove and replace the line in the presence of low platelets and high INR. Disease progressed from isolated aortic valve vegetation to multiple abscesses despite successful clearance of the organism from the blood. Patient was evaluated by two cardiothoracic surgeons and considered to have high mortality risk with cardiac surgery. Patient was deemed to be at very high risk for aortic valve surgery. The splenic flexure colonic ulcer could have served as the portal of entry for enterococcus from the gastrointestinal tract into the bloodstream. In this patient with liver disease and congestive heart failure, adding gentamicin to vancomycin to broaden coverage was judged inappropriate because of the risk of precipitating acute renal failure. Sustained clearance of the bacteraemia after initiation and after completion of the antibiotic course was taken as evidence that the antibiotic choice was appropriate. Impaired innate and adaptive immunity related to the patient's cirrhosis could have contributed to the development of endocarditis with valve abscess caused by this low-virulence enterococcus. Liver failure, thrombocytopaenia and nutritional status were all considered in the antibiotic decision-making process.

PENDING: Creatinine and gentamicin levels were monitored twice a week.

CONTEXT: the patient made an informed decision declining further aggressive treatment in favour of primary palliation of symptoms. no history of recent dental, gastrointestinal or genito-urinary procedure. no history of recent dental, gastrointestinal or genito-urinary procedure. no history of recent dental, gastrointestinal or genito-urinary procedure. no history of intravenous access lines or catheters prior to presentation. no history of intravenous access lines or catheters prior to presentation. He was awake, alert and had no evidence of hepatic encephalopathy. He had no Janeway lesions, Osler nodes or Roth spots. He had no Janeway lesions, Osler nodes or Roth spots. He had no Janeway lesions, Osler nodes or Roth spots. It was negative for casts. urine culture was negative. no evidence of pneumonia. without any adjacent abscess. biopsy was not done. The patient had no more fevers in hospital. inflammatory markers like C-reactive protein were not rechecked before the patient was discharged. The results of all blood cultures were negative. Peripheral stigmata of endocarditis were absent.