PATIENT: 66-year-old Hispanic man

DIAGNOSES: diabetes. psoriasis. upper gastrointestinal bleeding. lower limb cellulitis. MSSA. SA1. spondylodiscitis. infective endocarditis. interstitial nephritis. SA2. aortic valve vegetation. mitral valve vegetation. renal failure. SA2. SA3. SA1. SA2. SA1.

MEDICATIONS: Cephalothin 2 g every 6 hours. Cephalothin. Gentamicin 240 mg/day because of renal failure. Vancomycin 1 g every 12 hours, increased from 1 g because of combination with gentamicin and rifampin. Vancomycin. Gentamicin 240 mg/day. Rifampin 300 mg every 6 hours because of bone involvement in the spine.

RESULTS: blood pressure 110/70 mmHg. heart rate 70 beats/minute. respiration frequency 18 breaths/minute. hematocrit 28%. hemoglobin 9.6 g/dL. white blood cell count 11600/mm3. platelet count 197000/mm3. ESR 130 mm/hr. vancomycin MIC 1 ug/mL, unchanged from SA1: up to 2 ug/mL. blood culture negative. eosinophilia. MSSA positive. serum bactericidal rate bactericidal at 24 hours. trough vancomycin 14.1 mg/L. SA1 MIC 0.5 ug/mL. SA2 MIC 1 ug/mL. SA1 MIC 2 ug/mL. SA3 standard: MIC 1 ug/mL, MBC 128 ug/mL.

CLINICAL REASONING: Persistent bacteremia possibly due to metastatic infectious focus in left iliopsoas muscle and vertebrae. Initial vancomycin monotherapy may have failed to sterilize the bone due to poor vancomycin bone penetration. Negative aspirate cultures from iliopsoas lesion cannot rule out metastatic infectious focus due to low sensitivity of procedure in antibiotic-pretreated patients. Vancomycin MIC of 1 ug/mL or greater in the isolate could justify treatment failure. Vancomycin trough of 14.1 mg/L did not reach recommended 15-20 mg/L, suggesting subpopulations with reduced vancomycin susceptibility may have arisen during therapy contributing to treatment failure. Vancomycin-rifampin antagonistic effects were considered but not observed in this patient.

CONTEXT: smoking. alcoholism. The patient had not previously been exposed to glycopeptide antibiotics. no pain when flexing, extending or rotating the hip. Subsequent echocardiograms performed 15 days after the start of the treatment did not reveal any abscesses or changes in vegetation size. a new TEE was performed, which showed no vegetation. A tomography-guided needle puncture of the lesion in the left iliopsoas muscle showed no microbiological growth. Polymerase chain reaction detection of the mecA gene was negative in both isolates. his physical examination was unremarkable.